proposed/http-message-strategies/http-message-strategies-meta.md, before:

# HTTP Message Strategies Meta Document

## Contents

- [Summary](#1-summary)
- [Why Bother?](#2-why-bother)
- [Scope](#3-scope)
- [Design Decisions](#4-design-decisions)
- [People](#5-people)
- [Votes](#6-votes)
- [Relevant Links](#7-relevant-links)

## 1. Summary

This document describes the reasons behind decisions of the HTTP Message Strategies PSR.

## 2. Why Bother?

The HTTP Request-Response Cycle typically includes the following tasks:

1. The client creates a (plain) request object.
2. The client augments that request object.
3. The client sends the request object to the server.
4. The server augments the request object.
5. The server processes the request by:
  1. creating a (plain) response object
  2. augmenting that response object.
6. The server sends the response object back to the client.
7. The client augments the response object.
8. The client processes the fully augmented response object.

Common contracts for these tasks will allow libraries to be decoupled from
concrete frameworks and vice versa.

## 3. Scope

### 3.1. Goals

* Standardize common HTTP Message strategies to process HTTP Messages defined by [PSR-7](http://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-7/).
* Standardize contracts based on best practices.

### 3.2. Non-Goals

* Standardize or favor any particular application architecture or assume its presence.

## 4. Design Decisions

It is possible to distinguish two common approaches to process HTTP Messages: the _procedural_ approach in which methods mutate the state of their operands and the _functional_ approach in which methods return the result without modifying their operands.

[PSR-7](http://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-7/) HTTP Messages are [immutable objects](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immutable_object), which makes defining their augmentation by means of `callable` and/or `__invoke` interfaces the most natural choice.

### 4.1 Why not `callable`?

While it is possible to define contracts solely informal and/or by means of `callable`/`is_callable`, the PHP `interface` language feature provide several crucial benefits:

* It allows static source code analysis, which improves IDE and QA tool support.
* `instanceof` makes run-time type checking simple, fast and reliable.
* The contract is available through PHP comments.

### 4.2 Why `__invoke`?

The method name `__invoke` or any alternative name make no substantial difference
for interface implementers, but for callers – interface implementers MUST
implement the corresponding `interface` to comply with this PSR.

If we think of the absence of type declarations as the type declaration using
the (non-existing) `mixed` type, then the type hierarchy differences between
`__invoke` and non-`__invoke` interfaces can be pictured as:

![method name comparison image](resources/method-name-comparison.png)

The `__invoke` hierarchy allows callers to choose a more accurate type declaration depending on their needs, may it be `InvokableInterface`, `callable` or none at all (the `mixed` type-hint). If we chose a non-`__invoke` name and a caller may want to support `callable` too, then the caller must skip the `callable` type by removing the type declaration entirely and must type check at run-time. This is undesirable, because it hampers static source code analysis of the caller code.

Furthermore, current _higherorder functions_ like middlewares, routers, their dispatchers and many more become instantaneously compatible with an `__invoke` interface, which additionally makes `__invoke` superior to alternative method names.

## 5. People

### 5.1. Editor(s)

* [Michael Mayer](https://github.com/schnittstabil)

### 5.2. Sponsors

* Vacant (Coordinator)
* Vacant

### 5.3. Contributors

People who contributed in discussions, votes, by reviews or in other ways by alphabetical order:

* TBD

## 6. Votes

* **Entrance Vote:** TBD
* **Acceptance Vote:** TBD

## 7. Relevant Links

* TBD

Commit message:

[HMS] polish request response cycle

proposed/http-message-strategies/http-message-strategies-meta.md, after:

# HTTP Message Strategies Meta Document

## Contents

- [Summary](#1-summary)
- [Why Bother?](#2-why-bother)
- [Scope](#3-scope)
- [Design Decisions](#4-design-decisions)
- [People](#5-people)
- [Votes](#6-votes)
- [Relevant Links](#7-relevant-links)

## 1. Summary

This document describes the reasons behind decisions of the HTTP Message Strategies PSR.

## 2. Why Bother?

The HTTP Request-Response Cycle typically includes the following tasks:

1. The client creates a (plain) request object.
2. The client augments that request object.
3. The client sends the request object to the server and receives the produced response.
4. The server augments the request object.
5. The server creates a (plain) response object.
6. The server augments that response object before sending it back.
7. The client augments the received response object.
8. The client processes the fully augmented response object.

![request response cycle](resources/request-response-cycle.png)

Common contracts for these tasks will allow libraries to be decoupled from
concrete frameworks and vice versa.

## 3. Scope

### 3.1. Goals

* Standardize common HTTP Message strategies to process HTTP Messages defined by [PSR-7](http://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-7/).
* Standardize contracts based on best practices.

### 3.2. Non-Goals

* Standardize or favor any particular application architecture or assume its presence.

## 4. Design Decisions

It is possible to distinguish two common approaches to process HTTP Messages: the _procedural_ approach in which methods mutate the state of their operands and the _functional_ approach in which methods return the result without modifying their operands.

[PSR-7](http://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-7/) HTTP Messages are [immutable objects](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immutable_object), which makes defining their augmentation by means of `callable` and/or `__invoke` interfaces the most natural choice.

### 4.1 Why not `callable`?

While it is possible to define contracts solely informal and/or by means of `callable`/`is_callable`, the PHP `interface` language feature provide several crucial benefits:

* It allows static source code analysis, which improves IDE and QA tool support.
* `instanceof` makes run-time type checking simple, fast and reliable.
* The contract is available through PHP comments.

### 4.2 Why `__invoke`?

The method name `__invoke` or any alternative name make no substantial difference
for interface implementers, but for callers – interface implementers MUST
implement the corresponding `interface` to comply with this PSR.

If we think of the absence of type declarations as the type declaration using
the (non-existing) `mixed` type, then the type hierarchy differences between
`__invoke` and non-`__invoke` interfaces can be pictured as:

![method name comparison image](resources/method-name-comparison.png)

The `__invoke` hierarchy allows callers to choose a more accurate type declaration depending on their needs, may it be `InvokableInterface`, `callable` or none at all (the `mixed` type-hint). If we chose a non-`__invoke` name and a caller may want to support `callable` too, then the caller must skip the `callable` type by removing the type declaration entirely and must type check at run-time. This is undesirable, because it hampers static source code analysis of the caller code.

Furthermore, current _higherorder functions_ like middlewares, routers, their dispatchers and many more become instantaneously compatible with an `__invoke` interface, which additionally makes `__invoke` superior to alternative method names.

## 5. People

### 5.1. Editor(s)

* [Michael Mayer](https://github.com/schnittstabil)

### 5.2. Sponsors

* Vacant (Coordinator)
* Vacant

### 5.3. Contributors

People who contributed in discussions, votes, by reviews or in other ways by alphabetical order:

* TBD

## 6. Votes

* **Entrance Vote:** TBD
* **Acceptance Vote:** TBD

## 7. Relevant Links

* TBD
